London
London began on two small patches of dry land in the middle of a marsh on the north bank of the Thames. That was long before the Romans came. In Roman times it was named Londinium, and was already a thriving centre of trade. Since then London has grown and grown in political and military importance, in trade and wealth.
After the plague of 1665 and the Great Fire of London of 1666, much of London was rebuilt under the direction of Christopher Wren. The Industrial Revolution (18th century) and the advent of the railroads (mid. 19th ) accelerated its growth. Much was destroyed by air raids in the Second World War, and rebuilding has given parts of London a new vertical, geometrical aspect. It is a multiracial city with large population groups from former British Empire.
Today London covers a greater area than any other city in the world. London has about eight million inhabitants, and it is the capital of England, Great Britain, the United Kingdom and the former British Empire.
London is one of the biggest ports in the world, though it is situated far from the sea. It stands on the river Thames, about fourty miles from its mouth.
London is traditionally divided into several parts: the City, the West End, Westminster and the East End.
The City of London
The City of London is the commercial and financial heart of the UK. The City is roughly the London of the Middle Ages. It is about one square mile in area and only a few thousand people live here. But about half a million people come here to work during the day. The Stock Exchange, the Royal Exchange, the Bank of England are all situated in the City.
The Tower of London and St. Paul’s Cathedral are the main sights located in this district.
The Tower of London was founded by William the 1st in 1078. Originally it was a fortress, then a prison, a palace, and now it is a museum housing the national Collection of Armour, the Crown Jewels and the Royal Regalia. The Imperial State crown is exhibited in the Tower. It contains about three thousand precious stones; its weight is about sixteen kilos. The orbs and the scepters represent the power of the monarchy that you can feel everywhere here. The Royal Scepter has the largest cut diamond in the world – the 530 carats Star of Africa.
The Tower was the eyewitness of the most tragic and bloody events in British History. Edward the Fifth and his brothers, Charles Stuart, Queen Elizabeth the Fitst, Thomas More, Guy Fawkes and many other prominent Englishmen and women were among the Tower’s prisoners.
The Tower is still guarded by the Yeoman Warders, the famous beefeaters, who wear a traditional 16th century Tudor uniform. Modern Yeoman Warders (of whom there are about fourty) are still members of the Queen’s bodyguard and are all former warrant officers from Her Majesty’s Forces. Today the beefeaters combine their traditional role with the role of the guides.
Alongside with the beefeaters, for many centuries the Tower has been guarded by the ravens, and these birds are a symbol of the Tower. There is a legend that as long as the ravens are in the Tower, Britain will exist. Fortunately, these respected residents, since the reign of King Charles the Second, have been protected by the royal decree. The ravens are cared for by one of the Yeoman Warders called the Ravenmaster. The wings of the bird are now clipped to prevent them from flying away.
The ancient ceremony of the Keys takes place every night at 10 p.m. and attracts many tourists. At this ceremony, a version of which has been performed nightly for hundreds of years, the outer gates of the Tower are locked and the keys are delivered to the Resident Governor of the Tower.
St. Paul’s Cathedral is also in the City of London. It is a masterpiece of the well-known English architect Sir Christopher Wren. The old building of the Cathedral, founded in 604 and rebuilt several times, was sadly in need of repairs and Christopher Wren was called on to carry out the repairs and alternations. But he was prevented from doing this by the plague and the Great Fire of London of 1666 that destroyed the cathedral.
Only eight years later, after the ruins were cleared away, the new work was begun. It took Wren 35 years to build the Cathedral. When he died he was buried in St. Paul’s.
The Cathedral represents inspiration, beauty and craftsmanship on a grand scale. The architectural style of St. Paul’s is called Baroque, which combines classic lines with a strong sense of dynamic movement. The dome of the Cathedral is 365 feet high; it is the second largest in the world, next to St. Peter’s in Rome.
Beneath the dome there is the celebrated Whispering Gallery, called so because a whisper against the wall can be heard on the opposite side – about 42 metres away. Among the many memorials to famous men within the Cathedral are the tombs of the Duke of Wellington (the Victor of Waterloo) and Admiral Nelson (the hero of Trafalgar).
St. Paul’s Cathedral is still a place of regular Christian services, baptisms, weddings, and special services – some of national importance, for example, the wedding of the Prince of Wales to the Lady Diana Spencer.
Westminster
For nearly one thousand years Westminster has been the seat of Britain’s government, and for most of that time the home of its monarchs.
Westminster, meaning the monastery to the west, is a part of London where the Queen’s residence, the Prime Minister’s residence and the government offices are situated. That is a “district of power”.
The Houses of Parliament , or Westminster Palace, is situated on the bank of the Thames, near Westminster Bridge. Edward the Confessor, England’s king from 1042 to 1066, chose Westminster as the site for his royal palace. Since that time the palace has been rebuilt many times. Almost every English monarch altered the building in some way.
In 1265 Westminster Hall, the largest hall in Europe at that time, which was added by the son of William the Conqueror, was the scene of England’s first parliament. From the 14th to the 19th century the hall was used mainly by the King’s Courts of Law.
Westminster remained in use as the royal residence, where Parliament also met, until the 16th century, when Henry VIII in 1512 moved his residence to Whitehall and then to St. James’s Palace.
In 1834 most of the Parliament buildings were destroyed by a fire. The Houses of Parliament were rebuilt by Sir Charles Barry in the late Perpendicular Gothic style. The House of Lords and the House of Commons were ready by 1850. The Commons Chamber, however, was again destroyed during an air raid in 1941.
There are two big towers in the modern building: at the western end of the building is the Victoria Tower, completed in 1860, under which is the Sovereign’s Entrance, built for the annual ceremonial State Opening of Parliament.
At the eastern end is the Clock Tower, completed in 1858, so well known that it has become a symbol of London. The Tower is 320 feet high and its clock is said to be one of the most accurate in the world. The other name of the Clock Tower is Big Ben. Actually it is the name of the clock bell called so after Sir Benjamin Hall, superintendent of works when the clock was installed. The bell’s weight is about thirteen tons. Big Ben chimes the hours to notes from Handel’s music.
Westminster Abbey is situated not far from Westminster Palace. It is the chief church of England (St. Paul’s is the chief church of London). Westminster Abbey is first mentioned in a document of the 10th century. Originally there was a monastery or a church there. In the 11th century Edward the Confessor rebuilt it. Nothing of this church remains. The present-day building was begun by Henry VIII (13th century), and from that day on extensions and modifications in the Westminster Abbey continued for many centuries, the last major addition is the façade of the 18th century. Despite the range of time it covers, the Westminster Abbey is a harmonious whole in the English Gothic style.
It is not only architecture that makes Westminster Abbey one of the most popular places in London. The Westminster Abbey is also a museum of monuments and memorials to the great men of the past. Here are statesmen, scientists, philosophers. In Westminster Abbey the British monarchs are crowned and many are buried.
Literary men are gathered in Poet’s Corner, among them Charles Dickens, Thomas Hardy, William Thackeray, Rudyard Kipling. Those who have memorials here, although they are buried elsewhere, include William Wordsworth, John Keats, Percy Shelley, Robert Burns, William Blake, Jane Austen, sisters Brontë, William Shakespeare. Scientists buried in the Abbey include Newton, Darwin, Kelvin.
Near the Abbey’s west door is one of the best known memorials in the church, the grave of the Unknown Warrior whose body was brought from France and buried here in 1920. The grave commemorates those who were killed during the First World War, 1914-1918, and whose place of burial is unknown. The inscription on black marble includes the sentence “They buried him among the kings because he had done good toward God and toward his House”.
Buckingham Palace is also in Westminster. It is the official London residence of the royal family. The palace is a grey stone building. The flying Royal Standard over the Palace proclaims that the Queen is in the Palace.
The building of the palace was constructed in the 18th century for the Duke of Buckingham, and was called Buckingham House. King George III was greatly admired by the palace and bought it as a family home in 1762 for 28 000 pounds. In the 19th century the famous architect John Nash enlarged the palace and gave it a grand archway, called the Marble Arch, which was later moved to Hyde Park, because it turned out to be too narrow for the royal coach. The first monarch to live in Buckingham Palace was Queen Victoria. The latest modification as made in 1913, when Sir Aston Webb rebuilt the façade of the building in the neoclassical style.
The public is admitted into the palace to see the Royal horses and coaches and the Queen’s gallery. The ceremony called Changing of the Guard takes place every morning in front of Buckingham Palace and lasts about 30 minutes. This ceremony is a symbol of the most splendid traditions of the British monarchy.
In front of the gates of Buckingham Palace there is the Queen Victoria Memorial . Victoria was greatly loved by her subjects who placed a monument in her honour in front of the palace from which she ruled the country for more than 60 years. The huge monument made of marble and bronze was erected in 1901.
Buckingham Palace faces St. James’s Park , one of the most beautiful parks of London. The park is famous for its nice lakes where all kinds of waterbirds find a home. The park extends from Buckingham Palace to Whitehall, one of the main streets of London. The Cenotaph , the monument to those killed during the world wars, is in Whitehall. The “cenotaph” is a Greek word meaning “an empty tomb”. It looks like a plain obelisk.
Economic growth
Smith’s analysis of the market as a self- correcting mechanism was impressive. But his purpose was more ambitious than to demonstrate the self-adjusting properties of the system. Rather, it was to show that, under the impetus of the acquisitive drive, the annual flow of national wealth could be seen steadily to grow.
Smith’s explanation of economic growth , although not neatly assembled in one part of The Wealth of Nations, is quite clear. The score of it lies in his emphasis on the division of labour (itself an outgrowth of the “natural” propensity to trade) as the source of society’s capacity to increase its productivity. The Wealth of Nations opens with a famous passage describing a pin factory in which 10 persons, by specialising in various tasks, turn out 48,000 pins a day, compared with the few, perhaps only 1 , that each could have produced alone. But this all-important division of labour does not take place unaided. It can occur only after the prior accumulation of capital (or stock, as Smith calls it ), which is used to pay the additional workers and to buy tools and machines.
The drive for accumulation, however, brings problems. The manufacturer who accumulates stock needs more labourers ( since labour-saving technology has no place in Smith’s scheme), and in attempting to hire them he bids up their wages above their “natural” price. Consequently his profits begin to fall, and the process of accumulation is in danger of ceasing. But now there enters an ingenious mechanism for continuing the advance. In bidding up the price of labour, the manufacturer inadvertently sets into motion a process that increases the supply of labour, for “the demand for men, like that for any other commodity, necessarily regulates the production of men.” Specifically, Smith had in mind the effect of higher wages in lessening child mortality. Under the influence of a larger labour supply, the wage rise is moderated and profits are maintained; the new supply of labourers offers a continuing opportunity for the manufacturer to introduce a further division of labour and thereby add to the system’s growth.
Here then was a “machine” for growth - a machine that operated with all the reliability of the Newtonian system with which Smith was quite familiar. Unlike the Newtonian system, however, Smith’s growth machine did not depend for its operation on the laws of nature alone. Human nature drove it, and human nature was a complex rather than a simple force. Thus, the wealth of nations would grow only if individuals, through their governments, did not inhibit this growth by catering to the pleas for special privilege that would prevent the competitive system from exerting its begin effect. Consequently, much of The Wealth of Nations, especially Book IV, is a polemic against the restrictive measures of the “mercantile system” that favoured monopolies at home and abroad. Smith’s system of “natural liberty”, he is careful to point out, accords with the best interests of all but will not be put into practice if government is entrusted to, or heeds, the “mean rapacity, who neither are , nor ought to be, the rulers of mankind.”
The Wealth of Nations is therefore far from the ideological tract it is often supposed to be. Although Smith preached laissez-faire (with important exceptions), his argument was directed as much against monopoly as government; and although he extolled the social results of the acquisitive process, he almost invariably treated the manners and manoeuvres of businessmen with contempt. Nor did he see the commercial system itself as wholly admirable. He wrote with decrement about the intellectual degradation of the worker in a society in which the division of labour has proceeded very far; for by comparison with the alert intelligence of the husbandman, the specialised worker “generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is possible for a human being to become”.
In all of this, it is notable that Smith was writing in an age of preindustrial capitalism. He seems to have had no real presentiment of the gathering Industrial Revolution, harbingers of which were visible in the great ironworks only a few miles from Edinburgh. He had nothing to say about large-scale industrial enterprise, and the few remarks in The Wealth of Nations concerning the future of joint-stock companies (corporations) are disparaging. Finally, one should bear in mind, that, if growth is the great theme of The Wealth of Nations, it is not unending growth. Here and there in the treatise are glimpsed at a secularly declining rate of profit; and Smith mentions as well the prospects that when the system eventually accumulates its “full complement of riches” - all the pin factories, so to speak, whose output could be absorbed - economic decline would begin, ending in an impoverished stagnation.
The Wealth of Nations was received with admiration by Smith’s wide circle of friends and admires, although it was by no means an immediate popular success. The work finished, Smith went into semiretirement. The year following its publication he was appointed commissioner both of customs and of salt duties for Scotland, posts that brought him ?600 a year. He thereupon informed his former charge that he no longer required his pension, to which Buccleuch replied that his sense of honour would never allow him to stop paying it. Smith was therefore quite well off in the final years of his life, which were spent mainly in Edinburgh with occasional trips to London or Glasgow (which appointed him a rector of the university). The years passed quietly, with several revisions of both major books but with no further publications. On July 17, 1790, at the age of 67, full of honours and recognition, Smith died; he was buried in the churchyard at Canongate with a simple monument stating that Adam Smith, author of The Wealth of Nations, was buried there.
Beyond the few facts of his life, which can be embroidered only in detail, exasperatingly little is known about the man. Smith never married, and almost nothing is known of his personal side. Moreover, it was the custom of his time to destroy rather than to preserve the private files if illustrious men, with the unhappy result that much of Smith’s unfinished work, as well as his personal papers, was destroyed (some as late as 1942). Only one portrait of Smith survives, a profile medallion by Tassie; it gives a glimpse of the older man with his somewhat heavy-lidded eyes, aquiline nose, and a hint of protrusive lower lip. “I am a beau in nothing but my books, ”Smith once told a friend to whom he was showing his library of some 3,000 volumes.
From various accounts, he was also a man of many peculiarities, which included a stumbling manner of speech ( until he had warmed to his subject), a gait described as “vermicular”/ and above all an extraordinary and even comic absence of mind. On the other hand, contemporaries wrote of a smile of “inexpressive benignity,” and of his political tact and dispatch in managing the sometimes acerbic business of the Glasgow faculty.
Certainly he enjoyed a high measure of contemporary fame; even in his early days at Glasgow his reputation attracted students from nations as distant as Russia, and his later years were crowned not only with expression of admiration from many European thinkers but by a growing recognition among British governing circles that his work provided a rationale of inestimable importance for practical economic policy.
Over the years, Smith’s lustre as a social philosopher has escaped much of the weathering that has affected the reputations of other first-rate political economists. Although he was writing for his generation, the breadth of his knowledge/ the cutting edge of his generalization, the boldness of his vision, have never ceased to attract the admiration of all social scientists, and in particular economists. Couched in the spacious, cadenced prose of his period, rich in imagery and crowded with life, The Wealth of Nations projects a sanguine but never sentimental image of society. Never so finely analytic as David Ricardo nor so stern and profound as Karl Marx, Smith is the very epitome of the Enlightenment: hopeful but realistic, speculative but practical, always respectful of the classical past but ultimately dedicated to the great discovery of his age - progress.